
@@module Bastion

<h1>Bastion&#8212;Restricting access to objects</h1>

<p>Changed in version 2.3: Disabled module.


<p class='warning'><b>Warning:</b> The documentation has been left in
place to help in reading old code that uses the module.

<p>According to the dictionary, a bastion is &#8220;a fortified area or
position&#8221;, or &#8220;something that is considered a
stronghold.&#8221; It's a suitable name for this module, which provides
a way to forbid access to certain attributes of an object. It must
always be used with the {@link rexec} module, in order to allow
restricted-mode programs access to certain safe attributes of an object,
while denying access to other, unsafe attributes.

@@function Bastion(object[, filter[, name[, class]]])

<p>Protect the object {@var object}, returning a bastion for the object.
Any attempt to access one of the object's attributes will have to be
approved by the {@var filter} function; if the access is denied an
{@link exceptions.AttributeError} exception will be raised.

<p>If present, {@var filter} must be a function that accepts a string
containing an attribute name, and returns true if access to that
attribute will be permitted; if {@var filter} returns false, the access
is denied. The default filter denies access to any function beginning
with an underscore ("{@code _}"). The bastion's string representation
will be "{@code &ltBastion for }{@var name}>" if a value for {@var name}
is provided; otherwise, "{@code repr(}{@var object})" will be used.

<p>{@var class}, if present, should be a subclass of {@link
BastionClass}; see the code in bastion.py for the details. Overriding
the default {@link BastionClass} will rarely be required.

@@class BastionClass(getfunc, name)

<p>Class which actually implements bastion objects. This is the default
class used by {@link Bastion}. The {@var getfunc} parameter is a
function which returns the value of an attribute which should be exposed
to the restricted execution environment when called with the name of the
attribute as the only parameter. {@var name} is used to construct the
{@link repr} of the {@link BastionClass} instance.

@@text 
