
@@module mimetools

<h1>mimetools&#8212;Tools for parsing MIME messages</h1>
@@error unexpected div versionnote

<p>This module defines a subclass of the {@link rfc822} module's {@link
Message} class and a number of utility functions that are useful for the
manipulation for MIME multipart or encoded message.

<p>It defines the following items:

@@class Message(fp[, seekable])

<p>Return a new instance of the {@link Message} class. This is a
subclass of the {@link rfc822.Message} class, with some additional
methods (see below). The {@var seekable} argument has the same meaning
as for {@link rfc822.Message}.

@@function choose_boundary()

<p>Return a unique string that has a high likelihood of being usable as
a part boundary. The string has the form {@code '}{@var
hostipaddr}.{@var uid}.{@var pid}.{@var timestamp}.{@var random}'.

@@function decode(input, output, encoding)

<p>Read data encoded using the allowed MIME {@var encoding} from open
file object {@var input} and write the decoded data to open file object
{@var output}. Valid values for {@var encoding} include {@code
'base64'}, {@code 'quoted-printable'}, {@code 'uuencode'}, {@code
'x-uuencode'}, {@code 'uue'}, {@code 'x-uue'}, {@code '7bit'}, and
{@code '8bit'}. Decoding messages encoded in {@code '7bit'} or {@code
'8bit'} has no effect. The input is simply copied to the output.

@@function encode(input, output, encoding)

<p>Read data from open file object {@var input} and write it encoded
using the allowed MIME {@var encoding} to open file object {@var
output}. Valid values for {@var encoding} are the same as for {@link
decode}.

@@function copyliteral(input, output)

<p>Read lines from open file {@var input} until EOF and write them to
open file {@var output}.

@@function copybinary(input, output)

<p>Read blocks until EOF from open file {@var input} and write them to
open file {@var output}. The block size is currently fixed at 8192.

@@text 

@see 
{@link email Module email}

Comprehensive email handling package; supersedes the mimetools module.
@see 
{@link rfc822 Module rfc822}

Provides the base class for mimetools.Message.
@see 
{@link multifile Module multifile}

Support for reading files which contain distinct parts, such as MIME
data.
@see 
{@link http://www.cs.uu.nl/wais/html/na-dir/mail/mime-faq/.html http://www.cs.uu.nl/wais/html/na-dir/mail/mime-faq/.html}

The MIME Frequently Asked Questions document. For an overview of MIME,
see the answer to question 1.1 in Part 1 of this document.

<h2>Additional Methods of Message Objects</h2>

<p>The {@link Message} class defines the following methods in addition
to the {@link rfc822.Message} methods:

@@method getplist()

<p>Return the parameter list of the Content-Type: header. This is a list
of strings. For parameters of the form "{@var key}={@var value}", {@var
key} is converted to lower case but {@var value} is not. For example, if
the message contains the header "{@code Content-type: text/html; spam=1;
Spam=2; Spam}" then {@link getplist} will return the Python list {@code
['spam=1', 'spam=2', 'Spam']}.

@@method getparam(name)

<p>Return the {@var value} of the first parameter (as returned by {@link
getplist}) of the form "{@var name}={@var value}" for the given {@var
name}. If {@var value} is surrounded by quotes of the form `{@code
&lt}...{@code >}' or `{@code "}...{@code "}', these are removed.

@@method getencoding()

<p>Return the encoding specified in the Content-Transfer-Encoding:
message header. If no such header exists, return {@code '7bit'}. The
encoding is converted to lower case.

@@method gettype()

<p>Return the message type (of the form "{@var type}/{@var subtype}") as
specified in the Content-Type: header. If no such header exists, return
{@code 'text/plain'}. The type is converted to lower case.

@@method getmaintype()

<p>Return the main type as specified in the Content-Type: header. If no
such header exists, return {@code 'text'}. The main type is converted to
lower case.

@@method getsubtype()

<p>Return the subtype as specified in the Content-Type: header. If no
such header exists, return {@code 'plain'}. The subtype is converted to
lower case.
