
@@module pyclbr

<h1>pyclbr&#8212;Python class browser support</h1>

<p>The {@link pyclbr} can be used to determine some limited information
about the classes, methods and top-level functions defined in a module.
The information provided is sufficient to implement a traditional
three-pane class browser. The information is extracted from the source
code rather than by importing the module, so this module is safe to use
with untrusted source code. This restriction makes it impossible to use
this module with modules not implemented in Python, including many
standard and optional extension modules.

@@function readmodule(module[, path])

<p>Read a module and return a dictionary mapping class names to class
descriptor objects. The parameter {@var module} should be the name of a
module as a string; it may be the name of a module within a package. The
{@var path} parameter should be a sequence, and is used to augment the
value of {@code sys.path}, which is used to locate module source code.

@@function readmodule_ex(module[, path])

<p>Like {@link readmodule}, but the returned dictionary, in addition to
mapping class names to class descriptor objects, also maps top-level
function names to function descriptor objects. Moreover, if the module
being read is a package, the key {@code '__path__'} in the returned
dictionary has as its value a list which contains the package search
path.

@@text 

<h2>Class Descriptor Objects</h2>

<p>The class descriptor objects used as values in the dictionary
returned by {@link readmodule} and {@link readmodule_ex} provide the
following data members:

@@attribute module

<p>The name of the module defining the class described by the class
descriptor.

@@attribute name

<p>The name of the class.

@@attribute super

<p>A list of class descriptors which describe the immediate base classes
of the class being described. Classes which are named as superclasses
but which are not discoverable by {@link readmodule} are listed as a
string with the class name instead of class descriptors.

@@attribute methods

<p>A dictionary mapping method names to line numbers.

@@attribute file

<p>Name of the file containing the {@code class} statement defining the
class.

@@attribute lineno

<p>The line number of the {@code class} statement within the file named
by {@link file}.

@@text 

<h2>Function Descriptor Objects</h2>

<p>The function descriptor objects used as values in the dictionary
returned by {@link readmodule_ex} provide the following data members:

@@attribute module

<p>The name of the module defining the function described by the
function descriptor.

@@attribute name

<p>The name of the function.

@@attribute file

<p>Name of the file containing the {@code def} statement defining the
function.

@@attribute lineno

<p>The line number of the {@code def} statement within the file named by
{@link file}.
