
@@module quopri

<h1>quopri&#8212;Encode and decode MIME quoted-printable data</h1>

<p>This module performs quoted-printable transport encoding and
decoding, as defined in {@link http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1521.html RFC
1521}: &#8220;MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part One:
Mechanisms for Specifying and Describing the Format of Internet Message
Bodies&#8221;. The quoted-printable encoding is designed for data where
there are relatively few nonprintable characters; the base64 encoding
scheme available via the {@link base64} module is more compact if there
are many such characters, as when sending a graphics file.

@@function decode(input, output[,header])

<p>Decode the contents of the {@var input} file and write the resulting
decoded binary data to the {@var output} file. {@var input} and {@var
output} must either be file objects or objects that mimic the file
object interface. {@var input} will be read until {@var
input}.readline() returns an empty string. If the optional argument
{@var header} is present and true, underscore will be decoded as space.
This is used to decode &#8220;Q&#8221;-encoded headers as described in
{@link http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1522.html RFC 1522}: &#8220;MIME
(Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) Part Two: Message Header
Extensions for Non-ASCII Text&#8221;.

@@function encode(input, output, quotetabs)

<p>Encode the contents of the {@var input} file and write the resulting
quoted-printable data to the {@var output} file. {@var input} and {@var
output} must either be file objects or objects that mimic the file
object interface. {@var input} will be read until {@var
input}.readline() returns an empty string. {@var quotetabs} is a flag
which controls whether to encode embedded spaces and tabs; when true it
encodes such embedded whitespace, and when false it leaves them
unencoded. Note that spaces and tabs appearing at the end of lines are
always encoded, as per {@link http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc1521.html RFC
1521}.

@@function decodestring(s[,header])

<p>Like {@link decode}, except that it accepts a source string and
returns the corresponding decoded string.

@@function encodestring(s[, quotetabs])

<p>Like {@link encode}, except that it accepts a source string and
returns the corresponding encoded string. {@var quotetabs} is optional
(defaulting to 0), and is passed straight through to {@link encode}.

@@text 

@see 
{@link mimify Module mimify}

General utilities for processing of MIME messages.
@see 
{@link base64 Module base64}

Encode and decode MIME base64 data.
