
@@module uu

<h1>uu&#8212;Encode and decode uuencode files</h1>

<p>This module encodes and decodes files in uuencode format, allowing
arbitrary binary data to be transferred over ASCII-only connections.
Wherever a file argument is expected, the methods accept a file-like
object. For backwards compatibility, a string containing a pathname is
also accepted, and the corresponding file will be opened for reading and
writing; the pathname {@code '-'} is understood to mean the standard
input or output. However, this interface is deprecated; it's better for
the caller to open the file itself, and be sure that, when required, the
mode is {@code 'rb'} or {@code 'wb'} on Windows.

<p>This code was contributed by Lance Ellinghouse, and modified by Jack
Jansen.

<p>The {@link uu} module defines the following functions:

@@function encode(in_file, out_file[, name[, mode]])

<p>Uuencode file {@var in_file} into file {@var out_file}. The uuencoded
file will have the header specifying {@var name} and {@var mode} as the
defaults for the results of decoding the file. The default defaults are
taken from {@var in_file}, or {@code '-'} and {@code 0666} respectively.

@@function decode(in_file[, out_file[, mode[, quiet]]])

<p>This call decodes uuencoded file {@var in_file} placing the result on
file {@var out_file}. If {@var out_file} is a pathname, {@var mode} is
used to set the permission bits if the file must be created. Defaults
for {@var out_file} and {@var mode} are taken from the uuencode header.
However, if the file specified in the header already exists, a {@link
uu.Error} is raised.

<p>{@link decode} may print a warning to standard error if the input was
produced by an incorrect uuencoder and Python could recover from that
error. Setting {@var quiet} to a true value silences this warning.

@@exception Error()

<p>Subclass of {@link exceptions.Exception}, this can be raised by
{@link uu.decode} under various situations, such as described above, but
also including a badly formatted header, or truncated input file.

@@text 

@see 
{@link binascii Module binascii}

Support module containing ASCII-to-binary and binary-to-ASCII
conversions.
